An exposition of the mysteries enshrined in the stages of ascent for them that
seek to journey unto God, the Almighty, the Ever-Forgiving

         In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate!

Praise be to God Who hath made being to come forth from nothingness; graven
upon the tablet of man a measure of the mysteries of His eternity; taught him
from the storehouse of divine utterance that which he knew not; made him a
perspicuous book unto such as have believed and surrendered their souls; given
him to behold, in this dark and ruinous age, a new creation within all things;
and caused him to speak forth, from the midmost heart of eternity, and in a
new and wondrous voice, embodied in the most excellent Temple. And all to this
end: that every man may testify, in himself and by himself, before the Seat of
the revelation of his Lord, that there is none other God but Him; and that all
may reach that summit of realities where none shall contemplate anything but
that he shall perceive God therein. This is the vision of the splendours which
have been deposited within the realities of all things; for otherwise He,
exalted be His glory, is entirely sanctified above being seen or witnessed:
“No vision taketh in Him, but He taketh in all vision; He is the Subtile, the
All-Perceiving.”

And I praise and glorify that primal Sea which hath branched out from the
ocean of the unseen Essence, and that primal Morn which hath broken forth upon
the horizon of Singleness, and that primal Sun which hath risen in the heaven
of everlasting splendour, and that primal Fire which was kindled from the Lamp
of eternity within the Niche of oneness: He Who is called “Aḥmad” in the
kingdom of the exalted ones, and “Muḥammad” amongst the concourse of the
favoured ones, and “Maḥmúd” in the realm of the sincere; and in the hearts of
the knowing, “whichsoever ye call upon, most beauteous are His names.” And
upon His kindred and His companions be abundant, abiding, and eternal peace!

To continue: I have hearkened to the song of the nightingale of knowledge upon
the twigs of the tree of thine inmost being, and to the cooing of the dove of
certitude upon the branches of the bower of thine heart. Methinks I inhaled
the fragrance of purity from the raiment of thy love and, in perusing thy
letter, attained thy very presence. I noted, moreover, thine allusions to thy
death in God and thy life through Him, and the love thou dost cherish for the
beloved of the Lord and for the Manifestations of His names and the Exponents
of His attributes. I have purposed, therefore, to acquaint thee with holy and
resplendent tokens from the realms of might and glory, that haply they may
draw thee nigh unto the court of holiness, nearness, and beauty, and draw thee
to a station wherein thou shalt see naught in all existence but the hallowed
Countenance of thy Beloved, and wilt behold all of creation as a day wherein
none was deemed worthy of mention.

Of this did the nightingale of oneness sing in the garden of his mystical
treatise, saying, “And there shall appear upon the tablet of thine heart an
inscription of the subtle mysteries of the verse ‘Fear ye God; God will teach
you’, and the bird of thy spirit shall recall the sanctuaries of ancient
splendour, and soar upon the wings of longing into the heaven of the command
‘Walk the beaten paths of thy Lord’, and partake of the choice fruits of
communion in the gardens of the utterance ‘Feed, moreover, on every kind of
fruit.’”

By My life, O friend! Wert thou to taste the fruits of these verdant trees
that spring from the soil of true understanding, once the effulgent light of
His Essence hath been reflected in the Mirrors of His names and attributes,
yearning would seize the reins of patience and restraint from out thy hand and
stir thy spirit into commotion with the splendours of His light. It would draw
thee from this abode of dust unto thy true and heavenly habitation in the
midmost heart of mystic knowledge, and raise thee to a station wherein thou
wilt soar in the air even as thou treadest upon the earth, and wilt walk upon
the water even as thou movest over the land. Wherefore, may it rejoice me, and
thee, and whosoever mounteth into the heaven of knowledge, and whose heart
hath been revived by the breezes of certitude that waft from the Sheba of the
All-Merciful upon the meadow of his inner being. Peace be upon him who
followeth the way of guidance!

And further: the stages that mark the wayfarers’ journey from their mortal
abode to the heavenly homeland are said to be seven. Some have referred to
them as seven valleys, and others, as seven cities. And it is said that until
the wayfarer taketh leave of self and traverseth these stages, he shall never
attain the ocean of nearness and reunion nor taste of the matchless wine.

The first is the Valley of Search. The steed of this valley is patience;
without patience the wayfarer on this journey will reach nowhere and attain no
goal. Nor should he ever become downhearted: If he strive for a hundred
thousand years and yet fail to behold the beauty of the Friend, he should not
falter. For those who seek the Kaaba of “for Us” rejoice in the tidings “In
Our ways shall We assuredly guide them.” In their search, they have stoutly
girded up the loins of service and at every moment journey from the plane of
heedlessness into the realm of search. No bond shall hold them back and no
counsel deter them.

It is incumbent upon these servants to cleanse the heart, which is the
wellspring of divine treasures, of every marking; turn away from imitation,
which is following the traces of their forefathers; and shut the door of
friendship and enmity upon all the people of the earth.

In this journey the seeker reacheth a station wherein he seeth all created
things wandering distracted in search of the Friend. How many a Jacob will he
see searching after his Joseph, how many a lover will he behold hastening
towards the Well-Beloved; a world of adoring souls will he witness tracing the
path of the Adored One! At every moment he findeth a weighty matter, in every
hour he becometh aware of a new mystery; for he hath severed his heart from
both worlds and set out for the Kaaba of the Beloved. At every step, aid from
the invisible Realm will attend him and the fervour of his search will grow.

One must judge of search by the standard of the Majnún of love. It is related
that one day they came upon Majnún sifting the dust, his tears flowing down.
They asked, “What doest thou?” He said, “I seek for Laylí.” “Alas for thee!”
they cried, “Laylí is of pure spirit, yet thou seekest her in the dust!” He
said, “I seek her everywhere; haply somewhere I shall find her.”

Yea, though to the wise it be shameful to seek the Lord of Lords in the dust,
yet this betokeneth intense ardour in searching. “Whoso seeketh out a thing
and persisteth with zeal shall find it.”

The true seeker hunteth naught but the object of his quest, and the sincere
lover hath no desire save reunion with his beloved. Nor shall the seeker reach
his goal unless he sacrifice all things. That is, whatever he hath seen, and
heard, and understood—all he must set at naught with “no God is there”, that
he may enter into the realm of the spirit, which is the city of “but God”.
Labour is needed, if we are to seek Him; ardour is needed, if we are to drink
the nectar of reunion with Him; and if we taste of this cup, we shall cast
away the world.

On this journey the wayfarer dwelleth in every abode, however humble, and
resideth in every land. In every face he seeketh the beauty of the Friend; in
every region he searcheth after the Beloved. He joineth every company and
seeketh fellowship with every soul, that haply in some heart he may discern
the secret of the Beloved, or in some face behold the beauty of the Adored
One.

And if, by the help of the Creator, he findeth on this journey a trace of the
traceless Friend, and inhaleth the fragrance of the long-lost Joseph from the
heavenly herald, he shall straightway step into the Valley of Love and be
consumed in the fire of love. In this city the heaven of rapture is upraised,
and the world-illuming sun of yearning shineth, and the fire of love is set
ablaze; and when the fire of love is ablaze, it burneth to ashes the harvest
of reason.

Now is the wayfarer oblivious of himself, and of aught besides himself. He
seeth neither ignorance nor knowledge, neither doubt nor certitude; he knoweth
not the morn of guidance from the night of error. He fleeth from both unbelief
and faith, and findeth in deadly poison his heart’s relief. Wherefore ‘Aṭṭár
saith:

    For the infidel, error—for the faithful, faith;
    For ‘Aṭṭár’s heart, an atom of thy pain.

The steed of this valley is pain, and if there be no pain this journey will
never end. In this plane the lover hath no thought save the Beloved, and
seeketh no refuge save the Friend. At every moment he offereth a hundred lives
in the path of the Loved One, at every step he throweth a thousand heads at
His feet.

O My brother! Until thou enter the Egypt of love, thou shalt never gaze upon
the Joseph-like beauty of the Friend; and until, like Jacob, thou forsake
thine outward eyes, thou shalt never open the eye of thine inward being; and
until thou burn with the fire of love, thou shalt never find thyself in true
yearning’s embrace.

A lover feareth nothing and can suffer no harm: Thou seest him chill in the
fire and dry in the sea.

    A lover is he who is chill in hellfire;
    A knower is he who is dry in the sea.

Love accepteth no existence and wisheth no life: In death it seeth life, and
in shame it seeketh glory. To merit the madness of love, one must abound in
sanity; to merit the bonds of the Friend, one must be free in spirit. Blessed
the neck that is caught in His noose, and happy the head that falleth on the
dust in the path of His love. Wherefore, O friend, renounce thy self, that
thou mayest find the Peerless One; and soar beyond this mortal world, that
thou mayest find thy nest in the abode of heaven. Be as naught, if thou
wouldst kindle the fire of being and be fit for the pathway of love.

    Ne’er will love allow a living soul to tread its way;
    Ne’er will the falcon deign to seize a lifeless prey.

Love setteth a world aflame at every turn and layeth waste every land wherein
it raiseth its banner. Being hath no existence in its kingdom; the wise wield
no command within its realm. The leviathan of love swalloweth the master of
reason and slayeth the lord of knowledge. It drinketh the seven seas, but its
heart’s thirst is still unquenched and it asketh, “Is there yet any more?” It
shunneth its own self and draweth away from all on earth.

    Love’s a stranger to earth and heaven too;
    In him are lunacies seventy and two.

Love hath bound a myriad victims in its fetters and pierced a myriad wise men
with its arrow. Know that every redness thou seest in the world is from its
wrath, and every paleness in men’s cheeks is from its poison. It yieldeth no
remedy but death and walketh not save in the valley of extinction; yet sweeter
than honey is its venom upon the lover’s lips, and fairer its deadly sting, in
the seeker’s sight, than a hundred thousand lives.

Wherefore must the veils of the satanic self be burned away in the fire of
love, that the spirit may be cleansed and refined, and thus may apprehend the
station of Him but for Whom the world would not have been created.

    Kindle the fire of love and burn away all things;
    Then set thy foot into the land of the lovers.

And if, confirmed by the Creator, the lover escapeth the claws of the eagle of
love, he will enter the Realm of Knowledge and come out of doubt into
certitude, and turn from the darkness of wayward desire to the guiding light
of the fear of God. His inner eye will open and he will privily converse with
his Beloved; he will unlock the gates of truth and supplication and shut the
doors of idle fancy. He in this realm is content with the divine decree, and
seeth war as peace, and in death findeth the meaning of everlasting life. With
both inward and outward eyes he witnesseth the mysteries of resurrection in
the realms of creation and in the souls of men, and with a spiritual heart
apprehendeth the wisdom of God in His endless manifestations. In the sea he
findeth a drop, in a drop he beholdeth the secrets of the sea.

    Split the atom’s heart, and lo!
    Within it thou wilt find a sun.

Gazing with the eye of absolute insight, the wayfarer in this valley seeth in
God’s creation neither contradiction nor incongruity, and at every moment
exclaimeth, “No defect canst thou see in the creation of the God of mercy.
Repeat the gaze: Seest thou a single flaw?” He beholdeth justice in injustice,
and in justice, grace. In ignorance he findeth many a knowledge hidden, and in
knowledge a myriad wisdoms manifest. He breaketh the cage of the body and the
hold of the passions, and communeth with the denizens of the immortal realm.
He scaleth the ladders of inner truth and hasteneth to the heaven of inner
meanings. He rideth in the ark of “We will surely show them Our signs in the
world and within themselves”, and saileth upon the sea of “until it become
plain to them that it is the truth”. And if he meeteth with injustice he shall
have patience, and if he cometh upon wrath he shall manifest love.

There was once a lover, it is said, who had sighed for long years in
separation from his beloved, and wasted in the fire of remoteness. From the
rule of love, his breast was void of patience and his body weary of his
spirit; he reckoned life without her as a mockery, and the world consumed him
away. How many a day he found no respite from his longing; how many a night
the pain of her kept him from sleep. His body was worn to a sigh, and his
heart’s wound had turned him to a cry of sorrow. A thousand lives would he
freely have given for one taste of the cup of her presence, and yet even this
was not within his reach. The doctors knew no cure for him, and companions
avoided his company; yea, physicians have no remedy for one sick of love,
unless the favour of the beloved deliver him.

At last the tree of his longing yielded the fruit of despair, and the fire of
his hope fell to ashes. Then one night he could bear life no more, and he left
his house for the marketplace. On a sudden, a watchman followed after him. He
broke into a run, with the watchman in swift pursuit; then other watchmen came
together and barred every passage to the weary one. And that wretched one
cried from his heart, and ran here and there, and moaned to himself, “Surely
this watchman is ‘Izrá’íl, my angel of death, following so fast upon me, or he
is a tyrant of men, prompted by hatred and malice.” His feet carried him
on—that hapless one bleeding with the arrow of love—while his heart lamented.
Then he came to a garden wall, and with untold pain and trouble he scaled it.
He saw that it was very high; yet, forgetting his life, he threw himself down
into the garden.

And there he beheld his beloved with a lamp in her hand, searching for a ring
she had lost. When the heart-surrendered lover looked upon his ravishing love,
he drew a great breath and lifted his hands in prayer, crying, “O God! Bestow
honour upon the watchman, and riches and long life. For the watchman was
Gabriel, guiding this poor one; or he was Isráfíl, bringing life to this
wretched one!”

Indeed, his words were true; for he had found many a secret justice in this
seeming tyranny of the watchman, and had seen how many a mercy lay hid behind
the veil. In one stroke of wrath, the guard had joined one who was athirst in
the desert of love to the sea of the beloved, and dispelled the darkness of
separation with the shining light of reunion. He had led one who was afar to
the garden of nearness, and guided an ailing soul to the heart’s physician.

Now if the lover could have seen the end, he would from the beginning have
blessed the watchman, prayed God on his behalf, and seen his tyranny as
justice; but since the end was veiled to him, he lamented and made his plaint
in the beginning. Yet those who journey in the garden land of true knowledge,
since they see the end in the beginning, behold peace in war and conciliation
in enmity.

Such is the state of the wayfarers in this valley, but the people of the
valleys above this see the end and the beginning as one. Nay, they see neither
“beginning” nor “end” and witness neither “first” nor “last”. Nay rather, the
denizens of the city of immortality, who dwell in the celestial garden, see
not even “neither first nor last”: They fly from all that is first and repulse
all that is last. For these have passed over the worlds of names and, swift as
lightning, fled beyond the worlds of attributes. Thus is it said: “The
perfection of belief in Divine Unity is to deny Him any attributes.” And they
have made their dwelling-place in the shadow of the Divine Essence.

Wherefore Khájih ‘Abdu’lláh —may God the Most High sanctify his blessed
soul—hath made, in this connection, a subtle point and spoken an eloquent word
as to the meaning of “Guide Thou us on the straight path”, which is: “Show us
the right way; that is, honour us with the love of Thine Essence, that we may
be freed from occupation with ourselves and aught else save Thee, and may
become wholly Thine; that we may know only Thee, and see only Thee, and think
of none save Thee.”

Nay, they would even soar above this station, as it is said: “Love is a veil
betwixt the lover and beloved.” “More than this I am not permitted to tell.”

At this hour the morn of true knowledge hath dawned and the lamps of wayfaring
and wandering have been quenched.

    Veiled from this was Moses too,
    Despite His virtue and His light.
    Then thou who hast no wings at all,
    Abandon any hope of flight!

If thou be a man of communion and prayer, soar upon the wings of assistance
from the holy ones, that thou mayest behold the mysteries of the Friend and
attain the lights of the Beloved: “Verily, we are God’s, and to Him shall we
return.” After passing through the Valley of Knowledge, which is the last
station of limitation, the wayfarer cometh to the First Station of Unity and
drinketh from the cup of oneness, and gazeth upon the manifestations of
singleness. In this station he pierceth the veils of plurality, fleeth the
realms of the flesh, and ascendeth unto the heaven of unity. With the ear of
God he heareth; with the eye of God he beholdeth the mysteries of divine
creation. He steppeth into the inner sanctuary of the Friend and, as an
intimate, shareth the pavilion of the Well-Beloved. He stretcheth forth the
hand of truth from the sleeve of the Absolute and revealeth the mysteries of
divine power. He seeth in himself neither name nor fame nor rank, but findeth
his own praise in the praise of God, and in the name of God beholdeth his own.
To him “all songs are from that sovereign King” and every melody from Him. He
sitteth on the throne of “Say, all things are of God” and reclineth upon the
seat of “There is no power nor strength but in God alone.” He looketh upon all
things with the eye of Unity, and seeth the effulgent rays of the Sun of Truth
shining from the dayspring of the Divine Essence upon all created things
alike, and beholdeth the lights of Unity reflected upon all creation.

It is known to thine eminence that all the variations which the wayfarer in
the stages of his journey beholdeth in the realms of being proceed from his
own vision. We shall give an example of this, that the meaning may become
fully clear. Consider the visible sun: Although it shineth with the same
radiance upon all existence, and at the behest of the Lord of Revelation
bestoweth light on all things, yet in each place it becometh manifest and
sheddeth its bounty according to the potentialities of that place. For
instance, in a mirror it reflecteth its own disk and shape, and this is due to
the clarity of the mirror itself; through a crystal it maketh fire to appear;
and in other things it showeth only the effect of its shining, but not its
full disk. And yet, through that effect, by the command of the Creator it
traineth each thing according to the capacity of that thing, even as thou dost
observe.

In like manner, colours become visible in each object according to its nature.
For instance, in a yellow glass the rays shine yellow; in a white glass they
are white; and in a red glass red rays are visible. These variations proceed
from the object itself, not from the light. And if a place be shut away from
the light, as by walls and a roof, it will be entirely bereft of the light of
the sun and deprived of its rays.

Thus it is that certain feeble souls have confined the wide expanse of
knowledge within the walls of self and passion, and beneath the cloak of
ignorance and blindness, and have thereby veiled themselves from the light of
the mystic Sun and the mysteries of the eternal Beloved. They have strayed far
from the gem-like wisdom of the resplendent Faith of the Lord of the
Messengers, have been shut out of the inner court of the All-Beauteous, and
have been banished from the Kaaba of glory. Such is the worth of the people of
this age!

And if a nightingale soar beyond the clay of self and dwell in the rose bower
of the heart, and in Arabian melodies and sweet Persian tones recount the
mysteries of God—a single word whereof quickeneth anew every lifeless form and
bestoweth the spirit of holiness upon every mouldering bone—thou wilt behold a
thousand claws of envy and a myriad talons of hatred hunting after Him and
striving with all their power to encompass His death.

Yea, to the beetle a sweet fragrance seemeth foul, and to the man sick of a
rheum a pleasant perfume availeth naught. Wherefore hath it been said for the
guidance of the ignorant:

    Cleanse thou the rheum from out thine head
    And breathe the breath of God instead.

In sum, the differences among objects have now been made plain. Thus when the
wayfarer gazeth only upon the place of appearance—that is, when he considereth
only the glass—he seeth yellow and red and white. And so it is that conflict
hath prevailed amongst men, and a darksome dust from limited souls hath
settled over the world. Others gaze upon the effulgence of the light, while
yet others have drunk of the wine of oneness and see naught but the sun
itself.

As the wayfarers traverse these three differing planes, their understanding
and their words differ accordingly, and hence the sign of conflict hath ever
appeared on earth. For there are some who dwell on the plane of Divine Unity
and speak of that world, and some inhabit the realms of limitation, and some
the grades of self, while others are completely veiled. Thus do the ignorant
people of the day, who have no share of the radiance of the divine Beauty,
make certain claims and, in every age and cycle, inflict upon the people of
the ocean of Divine Unity what they themselves deserve. “If God should
chastise men for their perverse doings, He would not leave upon the earth a
moving thing! But to an appointed time doth He respite them.”

O My brother! A pure heart is as a mirror; cleanse it with the burnish of love
and severance from all save God, that the true sun may shine therein and the
eternal morning dawn. Then wilt thou clearly see the meaning of “Earth and
heaven cannot contain Me; what can alone contain Me is the heart of him that
believeth in Me.” And thou wilt take up thy life in thy hand and with infinite
longing cast it before thy newly found Beloved.

Whensoever the light of the revelation of the King of Oneness settleth upon
the throne of the heart and soul, His radiance becometh visible in every limb
and member. At that time, the mystery of the famed tradition gleameth out of
the darkness: “A servant is drawn unto Me in prayer until I answer him, and
when I have answered him, I become the ear wherewith he heareth …” For thus
the Master of the house hath appeared within His home, and all the pillars of
the dwelling are ashine with His light. And as the action and effect of the
light are from the Light-Giver, so it is that all move through Him and arise
by His will. This is that wellspring whereof the near ones drink, as it is
said: “A fount whereof they who draw nigh to God shall drink”.

However, let none construe these utterances to imply the incarnation or
descent of the worlds of God into the grades of His creatures, nor should they
lead thine eminence to such misapprehensions. For God, in His Essence, is
sanctified above all ascent and descent, egress and regress; He hath through
all eternity been exalted beyond the attributes of His creation, and will ever
remain so. No man hath ever known Him; no soul hath ever fathomed the nature
of His Being. In the valley of His knowledge every mystic wandereth astray; in
the comprehension of His Essence every saint standeth bewildered. Sanctified
is He above the understanding of the wise; exalted is He beyond the knowledge
of the knowing! “The way is barred and all seeking rejected. His proof is His
signs, His evidence His being.”

Wherefore the lovers of the countenance of the Beloved have said, “O Thou
Whose Essence alone can lead to His Essence, and Who transcendeth all likeness
to His creatures”. How can utter nothingness spur its charger in the arena of
eternity, or a fleeting shadow reach to the everlasting sun? The Friend
addressed by the words “But for Thee” hath said, “We have failed to know
Thee”; and the Beloved alluded to by the words “or even closer” hath said,
“nor attained Thy presence”.

Indeed, the references that have been made to the degrees of mystic knowledge
pertain to the knowledge of the effulgences of that Sun of Truth as it
becometh reflected in various mirrors. And the effulgence of that light is
present within the hearts, yet it is hidden beneath the veils of selfish
desires and earthly attachments, even as a candle within a lantern of iron,
and only when the cover is lifted doth the light of the candle shine out.

In like manner, when thou dost strip the veils of illusion from the face of
thine heart, the lights of Oneness will be made manifest.

It is clear, then, that even these rays are not subject to egress or
regress—how much less that Essence of existence and longed-for Mystery. O My
brother, consider these matters in the spirit of enquiry, not in blind
imitation. A true wayfarer will not be deterred by the impediment of words,
nor daunted by the sway of insinuations.

    How can a curtain part the lover from his love,
    When Alexander’s wall cannot keep them apart?

Secrets are many, and strangers are myriad. Volumes will not suffice to hold
the mystery of the Beloved, nor can it be exhausted in these pages, though it
be no more than a word, no more than a sign. “Knowledge is one point, which
the foolish have multiplied.”

Infer, then, from this the differences among the worlds. Though the worlds of
God be infinite, yet some refer to them as four: the world of time, which hath
both a beginning and an end; the world of duration, which hath a beginning but
whose end is not apparent; the world of primordial reality, whose beginning is
not to be seen but which is known to have an end; and the world of eternity,
of which neither the beginning nor the end is visible. Although there are many
differing statements as to these points, to recount them in detail would
result in weariness. Thus some have said that the world of primordial reality
hath neither beginning nor end, and have equated the world of eternity with
the invisible, inaccessible, and unknowable Essence. Others have called these
the worlds of the Heavenly Court, of the Celestial Dominion, of the Divine
Kingdom, and of Mortal Existence.

Moreover, the journeys in the pathway of love have been reckoned as four: from
the creatures to the True One, from the True One to the creatures, from the
creatures to the creatures, and from the True One to the True One.

There is many an utterance of the sages and mystics of former times which I
have not mentioned here, since I mislike copious citation from the sayings of
the past; for quotation from the words of others betokeneth acquired learning
and not divine bestowal. Even so much as I have quoted here is out of
deference to the wont of men and after the manner of the learned. Further,
such matters are beyond the scope of this epistle. My unwillingness to recount
their sayings is not from pride; rather, it is the manifestation of wisdom and
the revelation of bounty.

    If Khiḍr did wreck the vessel on the sea,
    A thousand rights are in this wrong concealed.

Otherwise, this Servant regardeth Himself as utterly lost and non-existent,
even before one of the beloved of God, how much less in the presence of His
holy ones. Glorified be my Lord, the Most High! Moreover, our aim is to
recount the stages of the wayfarer’s journey, not to set forth the conflicting
utterances of the mystics.

Although a brief example hath been given concerning the beginning and ending
of the relative and contingent world, yet a further illustration is now
provided, that the full meaning may become clear. For instance, let thine
eminence consider his own self: Thou art first in relation to thy son, and
last in relation to thy father. In thine outward appearance thou tellest of
the appearance of power in the realms of divine creation; in thine inward
being thou revealest the hidden mysteries which are the divine trust deposited
within thee. And thus firstness and lastness, outwardness and inwardness, are,
in the sense referred to, all true of thyself, so that in these four states
conferred upon thee thou mayest comprehend the four divine states, and that
the nightingale of thine heart, warbling on all the flowering branches of the
tree of existence, whether seen or unseen, might cry out: “He is the First and
the Last, the Seen and the Hidden!”

These statements are made in the sphere of that which is relative. Otherwise,
those souls who with but one step have traversed the world of the relative and
the conditioned, and dwelt in the court of independent sovereignty, and
pitched their tent in the realms of absolute authority and command, have
burned away these relativities with a single spark, and blotted out these
words with a mere dewdrop. And they swim in the sea of the spirit, and soar in
the holy atmosphere of light. Then what existence have words, on such a plane,
that “first” and “last”, or other than these, should be mentioned or
described? In this realm, the first is the same as the last, and the last is
the same as the first.

    In thy soul, of love build thou a fire
    And burn all thoughts and words entire.

O My friend, look to thyself: Hadst thou not become a father and begotten a
son, neither wouldst thou have comprehended these words. Now forget them one
and all, that thou mayest learn from the Master of Love in the schoolhouse of
Divine Unity, mayest return unto God, forsake the land of unreality for thy
true station, and dwell beneath the shadow of the tree of knowledge.

O thou dear one! Impoverish thyself, that thou mayest enter the lofty court of
riches; and humble thy body, that thou mayest drink from the stream of glory
and attain to the full meaning of the poems whereof thou hadst asked.

Thus it hath been made clear that these stages depend on the attainment of the
wayfarer. In every city he will behold a world, in every valley reach a
spring, in every meadow hear a song. But the falcon of the mystic heaven hath
many a wondrous carol of the spirit in its breast, and the Persian bird
keepeth in its soul many a sweet Arabian melody; yet these are hidden, and
hidden shall remain.

    If I speak forth, many a mind will shatter,
    And if I write, many a pen will break.

Peace be upon him who concludeth this exalted journey and followeth the way of
truth by the lights of guidance. The wayfarer, after traversing the high
planes of this supernal journey, entereth into the City of Contentment. In
this valley he feeleth the breezes of divine contentment blowing from the
plane of the spirit. He burneth away the veils of want, and with inward and
outward eye perceiveth within and without all things the day of “God will
satisfy everyone out of His abundance.” From sorrow he turneth to bliss, and
from grief to joy, and from anguish and dejection to delight and rapture.

Although, to outward seeming, the wayfarers in this valley may dwell upon the
dust, yet inwardly they are throned in the heights of mystic meaning; they
partake of the eternal bounties of heaven and drink of the delicate wines of
the spirit.

The tongue faileth in describing these three valleys, and speech falleth
short. The pen steppeth not into this arena, the ink leaveth only a blot. In
these stations, the nightingale of the heart hath other songs and secrets,
which make the heart to leap and the soul to cry out, but this mystery of
inner meaning may be whispered only from heart to heart, and confided only
from breast to breast.

    The bliss of mystic knowers can be only told from heart to heart,
    A bliss no messenger can bear and no missive dare impart.

    How many are the matters I have out of weakness left unsaid;
    For my words would fail to reckon them and mine every effort would fall short.

O friend, till thou enter the garden of these inner meanings, thou shalt never
taste of the imperishable wine of this valley. And shouldst thou taste of it,
thou wilt turn away from all else and drink of the cup of contentment; thou
wilt loose thyself from all things and bind thyself unto Him, and lay down thy
life in His path and offer up thy soul for His sake. And this, even though in
this realm there is no “all else” that thou needst forget: “God was alone;
there was none else besides Him.” For on this plane the traveller witnesseth
the beauty of the Friend in all things. In fire he seeth the face of the
Beloved; in illusion he beholdeth the secret of reality; in the attributes he
readeth the riddle of the Essence. For he hath burnt away all veils with a
sigh, and cast aside all coverings with a glance. With piercing sight he
gazeth upon the new creation, and with lucid heart he graspeth subtle
verities. The words “And we have made thy sight sharp in this day” are a
sufficient proof of this assertion and a befitting description of this state.
After journeying through the planes of pure contentment, the traveller cometh
to the Valley of Wonderment and is tossed upon the oceans of grandeur, and at
every moment his wonder increaseth. Now he seeth the embodiment of wealth as
poverty itself, and the essence of independence as sheer impotence. Now is he
struck dumb with the beauty of the All-Glorious; again is he wearied out with
his own life. How many a mystic tree hath this whirlwind of bewilderment
snatched by the roots, how many a soul hath it worn out and exhausted. For in
this valley the traveller is flung into confusion, albeit, in the eyes of him
who hath attained, such signs are esteemed and well beloved. At every moment,
he beholdeth a wondrous world and a new creation, and goeth from astonishment
to astonishment, and is lost in awe before the new handiwork of Him Who is the
sovereign Lord of all.

Indeed, O brother, if we ponder each created thing, we shall witness a myriad
consummate wisdoms and learn a myriad new and wondrous truths. One of the
created phenomena is the dream. Behold how many secrets have been deposited
therein, how many wisdoms treasured up, how many worlds concealed. Observe how
thou art asleep in a dwelling, and its doors are shut; on a sudden thou
findest thyself in a far-off city, which thou enterest without moving thy feet
or wearying thy body. Without taxing thine eyes, thou seest; without troubling
thine ears, thou hearest; without a tongue, thou speakest. And perchance when
ten years have passed, thou wilt witness in this temporal world the very
things thou hast dreamt tonight.

Now there are many wisdoms to ponder in the dream, which none but the people
of this valley can comprehend in their reality. First, what is this world
where without eye or ear or hand or tongue one can put all these to use?
Second, how is it that in the outer world thou seest today the effect of a
dream which thou didst witness in the world of sleep some ten years past?
Consider the difference between these two worlds, and the mysteries they
conceal, that, attended by divine confirmations, thou mayest attain unto
heavenly discoveries and enter the realms of holiness.

God, the Most High, hath placed these signs in men so that veiled minds might
not deny the mysteries of the life beyond, nor belittle that which hath been
promised them. For some hold fast to reason and deny whatever reason
comprehendeth not, and yet feeble minds can never grasp the reality of the
stages that we have related: The universal divine Intellect alone can
comprehend them.

    How can feeble reason embrace the Qur’án
    Or the spider snare a phoenix in its web?

All these states are to be found and witnessed in the Valley of Wonderment,
wherein the wayfarer at every moment seeketh for more and is not wearied. Thus
the Lord of the first and the last, in setting forth the grades of
contemplation and expressing bewilderment, hath said: “Increase my wonder and
amazement at Thee, O God!”

Likewise, reflect upon the perfection of man’s creation, and that all these
planes and states are folded up and hidden away within him.

    Dost thou deem thyself a small and puny form,
    When thou foldest within thyself the greater world?

We must therefore labour to destroy the animal condition, till the meaning of
humanity cometh to light.

Likewise, Luqmán, who had drunk from the wellspring of wisdom and tasted of
the waters of mercy, in proving to his son Nathan the planes of resurrection
and death, advanced the dream as evidence and example. We relate it here, that
through this evanescent Servant a memory may endure of that youth of the
school of Divine Unity, that elder of the realms of instruction and
detachment. He said: “O son, if thou art able not to sleep, then thou art able
not to die. And if thou art able not to waken after sleep, then thou shalt be
able not to rise after death.”

O friend, the heart is the dwelling-place of eternal mysteries: Make it not
the home of fleeting fancies. Waste not the treasure of thy precious life
occupied with this swiftly passing world. Thou comest from the world of
holiness: Bind not thine heart to the earth. Thou art a dweller in the court
of reunion: Choose not the homeland of the dust.

In sum, there is no end to the description of these stages, but because of the
wrongs inflicted by the peoples of this age, this Servant is disinclined to
continue:

    The tale remaineth yet unfinished and untold;
    Forgive me, then, for weariness hath taken hold.

The pen groaneth and the ink sheddeth tears, and the river of the heart
surgeth in waves of blood. “Nothing can befall us but what God hath destined
for us.” Peace be upon him who followeth the way of guidance! After scaling
the high summits of wonderment, the wayfarer cometh to the Valley of True
Poverty and Absolute Nothingness. This station is that of dying to the self
and living in God, of being poor in self and rich in the Desired One. Poverty,
as here referred to, signifieth being poor in that which pertaineth to the
world of creation and rich in what belongeth to the realms of God. For when
the true lover and devoted friend reacheth the presence of the Beloved, the
radiant beauty of the Loved One and the fire of the lover’s heart will kindle
a blaze and burn away all veils and wrappings. Yea, all that he hath, from
marrow to skin, will be set aflame, so that nothing will remain save the
Friend.

    When once shone forth the attributes
    Of Him Who is the ancient King,
    All mention Moses burned away
    Of every fleeting, transient thing.

Whoso hath attained this station is sanctified from all that pertaineth to the
world. Wherefore, if those who have reached the ocean of His presence are
found to possess none of the limited things of this perishable world, whether
earthly riches or worldly opinions, it mattereth not. For that which is with
His creatures is circumscribed by their own limitations, whereas that which is
with God is sanctified therefrom. This utterance must be deeply pondered, that
its purport may be clear. “Verily the righteous shall drink of a cup tempered
at the camphor fountain.” If the true meaning of “camphor” become known, our
true intent will become evident.

This station is that poverty of which it is said, “Poverty is My glory.” And
of inward and outward poverty there is many a stage and many a meaning which I
have not thought pertinent to mention here; hence I have reserved these for
another time, dependent on what God may desire and fate may seal.

This is the station wherein the multiplicity of all things perisheth in the
wayfarer; and the divine Countenance, dawning above the horizon of eternity,
riseth out of the darkness; and the meaning of “All on the earth shall pass
away, but the face of thy Lord” is made manifest.

O My friend! Listen with heart and soul to the songs of the spirit, and
treasure them as thine own eyes; for heavenly wisdoms, even as vernal showers,
will not rain forever upon the earth of men’s hearts, and though the grace of
the All-Bounteous One is never ceasing and never stilled, yet to every time
and era a portion is allotted and a bounty assigned, which is vouchsafed in a
given measure. “And no one thing is there, but with Us are its storehouses;
and We send it not down but in settled measure.” Indeed, the clouds of the
Loved One’s mercy rain only on the garden of the spirit, and bestow this
bounty only in the season of spring. Other seasons have no share in this
supernal grace, and barren lands hold no portion of this bounteous favour.

O My brother! Not every sea hath pearls; not every branch will flower, nor
will the nightingale sing thereon. Then, ere the nightingale of the mystic
Paradise repair to the celestial garden, and the rays of the morn of inner
meaning return to the Day-Star of Truth, make thou an effort, that haply in
this dust-heap of a mortal world thou mayest catch a fragrance from the
everlasting rose-garden and live in the shadow of the inhabitants of this
everlasting city. And when thou hast attained this highest plane and most
exalted degree, then shalt thou gaze on the Beloved and forget all else.

    The Friend, unveiled, doth shed the splendour of His light
    Through every door and wall, O ye endued with sight!

Thou hast given up the drop of life and drawn nigh unto the ocean of the
Well-Beloved. This is the goal thou didst seek; God grant thou mayest attain
thereunto.

In this city, even the veils of light are rent asunder and vanish away. “His
beauty hath no veiling save light, His countenance no covering save
revelation.” How strange that the Beloved is as visible as the sun and yet the
heedless still hunt after tinsel and base metal. Yea, the intensity of His
revelation hath veiled Him, and the fullness of His shining forth hath hidden
Him.

    Even as the noontide sun
    Hath the True One brightly shined,
    But alas that He hath come
    To the city of the blind!

In this valley the wayfarer passeth beyond the stages of the “unity of
existence” and the “unity of appearance” and reacheth a unity that is
sanctified above both of these stations. Ecstasy alone can encompass this
theme, not utterance nor argument; and whosoever hath dwelt at this stage of
the journey, or caught a breath from this garden, knoweth whereof We speak.

In all these journeys the wayfarer must stray not a hair’s breadth from the
Law, for this is indeed the secret of the Path and the fruit of the Tree of
Truth. And in all these stages he must cling to the robe of obedience to all
that hath been enjoined, and hold fast to the cord of shunning all that is
forbidden, that he may partake of the cup of the Law and be informed of the
mysteries of Truth.

If any of the utterances of this Servant be not understood, or lead to
perplexity, the same must be enquired of again, that no doubt may linger, and
that the meaning may shine as resplendent as the face of the Beloved dawning
from His “Glorious Station”.

These journeys have no visible ending in this temporal world, but the detached
wayfarer—should invisible confirmation descend upon him and the Guardian of
the Cause assist him—may traverse these seven stages in seven steps, nay
rather in seven breaths, nay even in a single breath, should God will and
desire it. This is “a token of His grace vouchsafed unto whomsoever He
pleaseth.”

They who soar in the heaven of Divine Unity and attain the depths of the sea
of detachment reckon this city—which is the station of life in God—as the
loftiest state of the mystic knowers and the furthermost homeland of the
faithful lovers. But to this evanescent One of the mystic ocean, this station
is the first gate of the heart’s citadel, that is, man’s first entrance to the
city of the heart; and the heart is endowed with four stages, which would be
recounted should a kindred soul be found.

    Shattered was the pen at once,
    Rent and torn in twain the page,
    When the pen did reach the point
    Of depicting such a stage.

O My friend! Many a hound hunteth this gazelle of the desert of oneness; many
an eagle pursueth this nightingale of the garden of eternity. Ravens of hatred
lie in wait for this bird of the heavens of God, and the huntsman of envy
stalketh this deer of the meadow of love. O Shaykh! Make of thine effort a
glass, that perchance it may shelter this flame from contrary winds, albeit
this flame doth long to be kindled in the lamp of the Lord and to shine in the
niche of the spirit. For the head that is raised up in the love of God will
assuredly fall by the sword, and the life that is aflame with longing will
assuredly be extinguished, and the heart that cleaveth to the remembrance of
the Beloved will assuredly break. How well hath it been said:

    Live free of love, for its peace
    Is grief and sorrow at each breath.
    It starteth but with ache and pain;
    It endeth but with loss and death.

Peace be upon him who followeth the way of guidance!

The novel thoughts thou hast expressed as to the symbolism contained in the
word “sparrow” were considered. Thou appearest to be well grounded in mystic
truth. However, in each realm, to every letter a meaning is allotted which
pertaineth to that realm. Indeed, the wayfarer findeth a secret in every name
and a mystery in every letter.

In one sense, these letters refer to the states of holiness. The first meaneth
“Free thyself from the promptings of self, then approach thy Lord.” The second
meaneth “Purify thyself from all save Him, that thou mayest offer up thy life
for His sake.” The third meaneth “Draw back from the threshold of the one true
God if thou art still possessed of earthly attributes.” The fourth meaneth
“Render thanks unto thy Lord on His earth, that He may bless thee in His
heaven, albeit in the realm of His unity His heaven is the same as His earth.”
The fifth meaneth “Remove from thine eyes the veils of limitation, that thou
mayest learn that which thou knewest not of the stations of holiness.”

Wert thou to hearken unto the melodies of this mortal Bird, then wouldst thou
seek out the eternal and undying chalice and renounce every fleeting and
perishable cup. Peace be upon him who followeth the way of guidance!
